Computer science
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
"Computer sciences" redirects here. For the American corporation, see Computer Sciences Corporation.
Expression for Church numerals in lambda calculus	Plot of a quicksort algorithm
Example of Computer animation produced using Motion capture	Half-adder circuit
Computer science deals with the theoretical foundations of information, algorithms and the architectures of its computation as well as practical techniques for their application.
Computer science
History
Outline
Glossary
Category
vte
Computer science is the study of algorithmic processes, computational machines and computation itself.[1] As a discipline, computer science spans a range of topics from theoretical studies of algorithms, computation and information to the practical issues of implementing computational systems in hardware and software.[2][3]

Its fields can be divided into theoretical and practical disciplines. For example, the theory of computation concerns abstract models of computation and general classes of problems that can be solved using them, while computer graphics or computational geometry emphasize more specific applications. Algorithms and data structures have been called the heart of computer science.[4] Programming language theory considers approaches to the description of computational processes, while computer programming involves the use of them to create complex systems. Computer architecture describes construction of computer components and computer-operated equipment. Artificial intelligence aims to synthesize goal-orientated processes such as problem-solving, decision-making, environmental adaptation, planning and learning found in humans and animals. A digital computer is capable of simulating various information processes.[5] The fundamental concern of computer science is determining what can and cannot be automated.[6] Computer scientists usually focus on academic research. The Turing Award is generally recognized as the highest distinction in computer sciences.

History
Main article: History of computer science
History of computing
Hardware
Hardware before 1960Hardware 1960s to present
Software
SoftwareUnixFree software and open-source software
Computer science
Artificial intelligenceCompiler constructionEarly computer scienceOperating systemsProgramming languagesProminent pioneersSoftware engineering
Modern concepts
General-purpose CPUsGraphical user interfaceInternetLaptopsPersonal computersVideo gamesWorld Wide Web
By country
BulgariaPolandRomaniaSoviet BlocSoviet UnionYugoslavia
Timeline of computing
before 19501950–19791980–19891990–19992000–20092010–20192020–presentmore timelines ...
Glossary of computer science
Category Category
vte

Charles Babbage, sometimes referred to as the "father of computing".[7]

Ada Lovelace published the first algorithm intended for processing on a computer.[8]
The earliest foundations of what would become computer science predate the invention of the modern digital computer. Machines for calculating fixed numerical tasks such as the abacus have existed since antiquity, aiding in computations such as multiplication and division. Algorithms for performing computations have existed since antiquity, even before the development of sophisticated computing equipment.

Wilhelm Schickard designed and constructed the first working mechanical calculator in 1623.[9] In 1673, Gottfried Leibniz demonstrated a digital mechanical calculator, called the Stepped Reckoner.[10] Leibniz may be considered the first computer scientist and information theorist, for, among other reasons, documenting the binary number system. In 1820, Thomas de Colmar launched the mechanical calculator industry[note 1] when he invented his simplified arithmometer, the first calculating machine strong enough and reliable enough to be used daily in an office environment. Charles Babbage started the design of the first automatic mechanical calculator, his Difference Engine, in 1822, which eventually gave him the idea of the first programmable mechanical calculator, his Analytical Engine.[11] He started developing this machine in 1834, and "in less than two years, he had sketched out many of the salient features of the modern computer".[12] "A crucial step was the adoption of a punched card system derived from the Jacquard loom"[12] making it infinitely programmable.[note 2] In 1843, during the translation of a French article on the Analytical Engine, Ada Lovelace wrote, in one of the many notes she included, an algorithm to compute the Bernoulli numbers, which is considered to be the first published algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer.[13] Around 1885, Herman Hollerith invented the tabulator, which used punched cards to process statistical information; eventually his company became part of IBM. Following Babbage, although unaware of his earlier work, Percy Ludgate in 1909 published [14] the 2nd of the only two designs for mechanical analytical engines in history. In 1937, one hundred years after Babbage's impossible dream, Howard Aiken convinced IBM, which was making all kinds of punched card equipment and was also in the calculator business[15] to develop his giant programmable calculator, the ASCC/Harvard Mark I, based on Babbage's Analytical Engine, which itself used cards and a central computing unit. When the machine was finished, some hailed it as "Babbage's dream come true".[16]

During the 1940s, with the development of new and more powerful computing machines such as the Atanasoff–Berry computer and ENIAC, the term computer came to refer to the machines rather than their human predecessors.[17] As it became clear that computers could be used for more than just mathematical calculations, the field of computer science broadened to study computation in general. In 1945, IBM founded the Watson Scientific Computing Laboratory at Columbia University in New York City. The renovated fraternity house on Manhattan's West Side was IBM's first laboratory devoted to pure science. The lab is the forerunner of IBM's Research Division, which today operates research facilities around the world.[18] Ultimately, the close relationship between IBM and the university was instrumental in the emergence of a new scientific discipline, with Columbia offering one of the first academic-credit courses in computer science in 1946.[19] Computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline in the 1950s and early 1960s.[20][21] The world's first computer science degree program, the Cambridge Diploma in Computer Science, began at the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory in 1953. The first computer science department in the United States was formed at Purdue University in 1962.[22] Since practical computers became available, many applications of computing have become distinct areas of study in their own rights.

See also: History of computing and History of informatics

Etymology
See also: Informatics § Etymology
Although first proposed in 1956,[23] the term "computer science" appears in a 1959 article in Communications of the ACM,[24] in which Louis Fein argues for the creation of a Graduate School in Computer Sciences analogous to the creation of Harvard Business School in 1921,[25] justifying the name by arguing that, like management science, the subject is applied and interdisciplinary in nature, while having the characteristics typical of an academic discipline.[24] His efforts, and those of others such as numerical analyst George Forsythe, were rewarded: universities went on to create such departments, starting with Purdue in 1962.[26] Despite its name, a significant amount of computer science does not involve the study of computers themselves. Because of this, several alternative names have been proposed.[27] Certain departments of major universities prefer the term computing science, to emphasize precisely that difference. Danish scientist Peter Naur suggested the term datalogy,[28] to reflect the fact that the scientific discipline revolves around data and data treatment, while not necessarily involving computers. The first scientific institution to use the term was the Department of Datalogy at the University of Copenhagen, founded in 1969, with Peter Naur being the first professor in datalogy. The term is used mainly in the Scandinavian countries. An alternative term, also proposed by Naur, is data science; this is now used for a multi-disciplinary field of data analysis, including statistics and databases.